As simple as that. And he was condemned to spend the rest of his life in
Shawshank - or the part of it that mattered. Five years later he began to have
parole hearings, and he was turned down just as regular as clockwork in spite of
being a model prisoner. Getting a pass out of Shawshank when you've got murder
stamped on your admittance-slip is slow work, as slow as a river eroding a rock.
Seven men sit on the board, two more than at most state prisons, and every one
of those seven has an ass as hard as the water drawn up from a mineral-spring
well. You can't buy those guys, you can't sweet-talk them, you can't cry for

them. As far as the board in here is concerned, money don't talk, and nobody
walks. There were other reasons in Andy's case as well . . . but that belongs a
little further along in my story.

There was a trusty, name of Kendricks, who was into me for some pretty heavy
money back in the fifties, and it was four years before he got it all paid off.

Most of the interest he paid me was information-in my line of work, you're dead
if you can't find ways of keeping your ear to the ground. This Kendricks, for
instance, had access to records I was never going to see running a stamper down
in    the goddam plate-shop.

Kendricks told me that the parole board vote was 7-0 against Andy Dufresne
through 1957, 6-1 in '58, 7-0 again in '59, and 5-2 in '60. After that I don't
know, but I do know that sixteen years later he was still in Cell 14 of

Cellblock 5. By then â€“ 1975 - he was fifty-seven. They probably would have 
gotten
big-hearted and let him out around 1983. They give you life, and that's what

they take-all of it that counts, anyway. Maybe they set you loose someday, but 
.

. . ..

Well, listen: I knew this guy, Sherwood Bolton, his name was, and he had
this pigeon in his cell. From 1945 until 1953, when they let him out, he had
that pigeon. He wasn't any Birdman of Alcatraz; he just had this pigeon. Jake,

he called him. He set Jake free a day before he, Sherwood, that is, was to walk,
and Jake flew away just as pretty as you could want. But about a week after
Sherwood Bolton left our happy little family, a friend of mine called me over to
the  west corner of the exercise yard, where Sherwood used to hang out. A bird
was lying there like a very small pile of dirty bed-linen. It looked starved. My
friend said: "Isn't that Jake, Red?" It was. That pigeon was just as dead as a
turd.

I remember the first time Andy Dufresne got in touch with me for something; I
remember like it was yesterday. That wasn't the time he wanted Rita Hayworth,
though. That came later. In that summer of 1948 he came around for something
else.

Most of my deals are done right there in the exercise yard, and that's where


this one went down. Our yard is big, much bigger than most It's a perfect
square, ninety yards on a side. The north side is the outer wall, with a

guard-tower at either end. The guards up there are armed with binoculars and
riot guns. The main gate is in that north side. The truck loading-bays are on
the south side of the yard. There are five of them. Shawshank is a busy place
during the work week-deliveries in, deliveries out. We have the license-plate
factory, and a big industrial laundry that does all the prison wet-wash, plus 
that
of Kittery Receiving Hospital and the Eliot Nursing Home. There's also a big
automotive garage where mechanic inmates fix prison, state, and municipal

vehicles-not to mention the private cars of the screws, the administration 
officers . . .
and, on more than one occasion, those of the parole board.

The east side is a thick stone wall full of tiny slit windows. Cellblock 5 is on
the other side of that wall. The west side is Administration and the infirmary.

Shawshank has never been as overcrowded as most prisons, and back in '48 it was
only filled to something like two-thirds capacity, but at any given time there

might be eighty to a hundred and twenty cons on the yard- playing toss with a
football or a baseball, shooting craps, jawing at each other, making deals. On
Sunday    the place was even more crowded; on Sunday the place would have looked
like  a country holiday . . . if there had been any women.

It was on a Sunday that Andy first came to me. I had just finished talking to

Elmore Armitage, a fellow who often came in handy to me, about a radio when Andy
walked up. I knew who he was, of course; he had a reputation for being a snob

and a cold fish. People were saying he was marked for trouble already. One of

the people saying so was Bogs Diamond, a bad man to have on your case. Andy had
no cellmate, and I'd heard that was just the way he wanted it, although people

were already saying he thought his shit smelled sweeter than the ordinary. But I
don't have to listen to rumors about a man when I can judge him for myself.
"Hello," he said. "I'm Andy Dufresne." He offered his hand and I shook it. He
wasn't a man to waste time being social; he got right to the point. "I

understand that you're a man who knows how to get things . "

I agreed that I was able to locate certain items from time to time.
"How do you do that?" Andy asked.

"Sometimes," I said, "things just seem to come into my hand. I can't explain it.
Unless it's because I'm Irish."

He smiled a little at that. "I wonder if you could get me a rock hammer. "
"What would that be, and why would you want it?"

Andy looked surprised. "Do you make motivations a part of your business?" With


words like those I could understand how he had gotten a reputation for being the
snobby sort, the kind of guy who likes to put on airs-but I sensed a tiny 
thread

of humor in his question.

"I'll tell you," I said. "If you wanted a toothbrush, I wouldn't ask questions.

I'd just quote you a price. Because a toothbrush, you see, is a non-lethal sort
of an object."

"You have strong feelings about lethal objects?"
"I do."

An old friction-taped baseball flew toward us and he turned, cat-quick, and
picked it out of the air. It was a move Frank Malzone would have been proud of.

Andy flicked the ball back to where it had come from-just a quick and

easy-looking flick of the wrist, but that throw had some mustard on it, just the
same. I could see a lot of people were watching us with one eye as they went
about their business. Probably the guards in the tower were watching, too. I
won't gild the lily; there are cons that swing weight in any prison, maybe four
or five in a small one, maybe two or three dozen in a big one. At Shawshank I

was one of those with some weight, and what I thought of Andy Dufresne would
have a lot to do with how his time went. He probably knew it, too, but he wasn't
kowtowing or sucking up to me, and I respected him for that.

"Fair enough. I'll tell you what it is and why I want it. A rock hammer looks
like a miniature pickaxe-about so long." He held his hands about a foot apart,
and that was when I first noticed how neatly kept his nails were. "It's got a
small sharp pick on one end and a flat, blunt hammerhead on the other. I want it
because I like rocks."

"Rocks, " I said.

"Squat down here a minute," he said.

I humored him. We hunkered down on our haunches like Indians.

Andy took a handful of exercise yard dirt and began to sift it between his neat
hands, so it emerged in a fine cloud. Small pebbles were left over, one or two
sparkly, the rest dull and plain. One of the dull ones was quartz, but it was
only dull until you'd rubbed it clean. Then it had a nice milky glow. Andy did
the cleaning and then tossed it to me. I caught it and named it.

"Quartz, sure," he said. "And look. Mica. Shale. Silted granite. Here's a place
of graded limestone, from when they cut this place out of the side of the 
hill."

He tossed them away and dusted his hands. "I'm a rockhound. At least . . . I 
was


a rockhound. In my old life. I'd like to be one again, on a limited scale."

"Sunday expeditions in the exercise yard?" I asked, standing up. It was a silly
idea, and yet . . . seeing that little piece of quartz had given my heart a

funny tweak. I don't know exactly why; just an association with the outside
world, I suppose. You didn't think of such things in terms of the yard. Quartz
was something you picked out of a small, quick-running stream.

"Better to have Sunday expeditions here than no Sunday expeditions at all," he
said.

"You could plant an item like that rock-hammer in somebody's skull," I remarked.
"I have no enemies here," he said quietly.

"No?" I smiled. "Wait awhile."

"If there's trouble, I can handle it without using a rock hammer. "

"Maybe you want to try an escape? Going under the wall? Because if you do-"

He laughed politely. When I saw the rock-hammer three weeks later, I understood
why.

"You know," I said, "if anyone sees you with it, they'll take it away. If they
saw you with a spoon, they'd take it away. What are you going to do, just sit
down here in the yard and start bangin' away?"

"Oh, I believe I can do a lot better than that."

I nodded. That part of it really wasn't my business, anyway. A man engages my
services to get him something. Whether he can keep it or not after I get it is

his business.

"How much would an item like that go for?" I asked. I was beginning to enjoy his
quiet, low-key style. When you've spent ten years in stir, as I had then, you

can get awfully tired of the bellowers and the braggarts and the loud-mouths.
Yes, I think it would be fair to say I liked Andy from the first.

"Eight dollars in any rock-and-gem shop," he said, "but I realize that in a
business like yours you work on a cost-plus basis-"

"Cost plus ten per cent is my going rate, but I have to go up some on a 
dangerous
item. For something like the gadget you're talking about, it takes a little more
goose-grease to get the wheel turning. Let's say ten dollars.'


"Ten it is."

I looked at him, smiling a little. "Have you got ten dollars?"
"I do," he said quietly.

A long time after, I discovered that he had better than five hundred. He had
brought it in with him. When they check you at this hotel, one of the bellhops
is obliged to bend you over ant take a look up your works-but there are a lot of
works, and, not to put too fine a point on it, a man who is really determined
can get; fairly large item quite a ways up them-far enough to be out o sight,
unless the bellhop you happen to draw is in the mood to pull on a rubber glove
and go prospecting.

"That's fine, " I said. "You ought to know what I expect if you get caught with
what I get you."

"I suppose I should," he said, and I could tell by the slight change in his gray
eyes that he knew exactly what I was going to say. It was a slight lightening, a
gleam of his special ironic humor

"If you get caught, you'll say you found it. That's about the long and short of
it. They'll put you in solitary for three or you weeks . . . plus, of course,

you'll lose your toy and you'll get black mark on your record. If you give them
my name, you and will never do business again. Not for so much as a pair of
shoelace or a bag of Bugler. And I'll send some fellows around to lump you up. I
don't like violence, but you'll understand my position. I can' allow it to get
around that I can't handle myself. That would sure finish me."

"Yes. I suppose it would. I understand, and you don't need to worry. "
"I never worry," I said. "In a place like this there's no percentage in it."

He nodded and walked away. Three days later he walked u] beside me in the
exercise yard during the laundry's morning break He didn't speak or even look my
way, but pressed a picture of the Honorable Alexander Hamilton into my hand

as neatly as a good magician does a card-trick. He was a man who adapted fast.

I got him his rock-hammer. I had it in my cell for one night, and it was just 
as he described
it. It was no tool for escape (it would have taken a man just about six hundred 
years to
tunnel under the wall using that rock-hammer, I figured), but I still felt some 
misgivings. If
you planted that pickaxe end in a man's head, he would surely never

listen to Fibber McGee and Molly on the radio again. And Andy had already begun 
having
trouble with the sisters. I hoped it wasn't them he was wanting the rock-

hammer for.


In the end, I trusted my judgment. Early the next morning, twenty minutes before
the wake-up horn went off, I slipped the rock-hammer and a package of Camels to
Ernie, the old trusty who swept the Cellblock 5 corridors until he was let free

in 1956. He slipped it into his tunic without a word, and I didn't see the

rock hammer again for nineteen years, and by then it was damned near worn away 
to
nothing.

The following Sunday Andy walked over to me in the exercise yard again. He was
nothing to look at that day, I can tell you. His lower lip was swelled up so 
big

it looked like a summer sausage, his right eye was swollen half-shut, and there
was an ugly washboard scrape across one cheek. He was having his troubles with
the sisters, all right, but he never mentioned them. "Thanks for the tool," he

said, and walked away.

I watched him curiously. He walked a few steps, saw something in the dirt, bent
over, and picked it up. It was a small rock. Prison fatigues, except for those
worn  by mechanics when they're on the job, have no pockets. But there are ways
to get around that. The little pebble disappeared up Andy's sleeve and didn't
come down. I admired that . . . and I admired him. In spite of the problems he
was having, he was going on with his life. There are thousands who don't or
won't or can't, and plenty of them aren't in prison, either. And I noticed that,
although his face looked as if a twister had happened to it, his hands were

still neat and clean, the nails well-kept.

I didn't see much of him over the next six months; Andy spent a lot of that time
in solitary.