Which leads us, I guess, to the subject of jailbreaks. Sure, they happen from
time to time in our happy little family. You don't go over the wall, though, not
at Shawshank, not if you're smart. The searchlight beams go all night, probing
long white fingers across the open fields that surround the prison on three
sides and the stinking marshland on the fourth. Cons do go over the wall from
time to time, and the searchlights almost always catch them. If not, they get

picked up trying to thumb a ride on Highway 6 or Highway 99. If they try to cut
across country, some farmer sees them and just phones the location in to the
prison. Cons who go over the wall are stupid cons. Shawshank is no Canon City,
but in a rural area a man humping his ass across country in a gray pajama suit
sticks out like a cockroach on a wedding cake.

Over the years, the guys who have done the best-maybe oddly, maybe not so
oddly-are the guys who did it on the spur of the moment. Some of them have gone
out    in the middle of a cartful of sheets; a convict sandwich on white, you 
could
say. There was a lot of that when I first came in here, but over the years they

have more or less closed that loophole.

Warden Norton's famous "Inside-Out" program produced its share of escapees, too.
They were the guys who decided they liked what lay to the right of the hyphen
better than what lay to the left. And again, in most cases it was a very casual

kind of thing. Drop your blueberry rake and stroll into the bushes while one of
the screws is having a glass of water at the truck or when a couple o~ them get
too involved in arguing over yards passing or rushing or the old Boston
Patriots.

In 1969, the Inside-Outers were picking potatoes in Sabbatus. It was the third
of November and the work was almost done. There was a guard named Henry
Pugh - and he is no longer a member o our happy little family, believe me â€“
sitting on the back bumper of one of the potato trucks and having his lunch with
his carbine across his knees when a beautiful (or so it was told to me, but
sometimes these things get exaggerated) ten-point buck strolled out of the cold
early afternoon mist. Pugh went after it with visions of just how that trophy
would look mounted in his rec room, and while he was doing it, three of his
charges just walked away. Two were recaptured in a Lisbon Falls pinball parlor.


The third has not beer found to this day.

I suppose the most famous case of all was that of Sid Nedeau. This goes back to
1958, and I guess it will never be topped. Sid was out lining the ball field 
for

a Saturday intramural baseball game when the three o'clock inside whistle blew,
signaling the shift change for the guards. The parking lot is just beyond the
exercise yard, on the other side of the electrically operated main gate. At

three the gate opens and the guards coming on duty and those going off mingle.
There's a lot of back-slapping and bullyragging, comparison of league bowling
scores and the usual number of tired old ethnic jokes.

Sid just trundled his lining machine right out through the gate, leaving a
three-inch baseline all the way from home plate in the exercise yard to the

ditch on the far side of Route 6, where they found the machine overturned in a
pile of lime. Don't ask me how he did it. He was dressed in his prison uniform,
he stood six-feet-two, and he was billowing clouds of lime-dust behind him All I
can figure is that, it being Friday afternoon and all, the guards going off 
were

so happy to be going off, and the guards coming on were so downhearted to be
coming on, that the members of the former group never got their heads out of the
clouds and those in the latter never got their noses off their shoe tops . . .

and old Sid Nedeau just sort of slipped out between the two.

So far as I know, Sid is still at large. Over the years, Andy Dufresne and I 
had

a good many laughs over Sid Nedeau's great escape, and when we heard about that
airline hijacking for ransom, the one where the guy parachuted from the back

door of the airplane, Andy swore up and down that D. B. Cooper's real name was
Sid Nedeau.

"And he probably had a pocketful of baseline lime in his pocket for good luck,"
Andy said. "That lucky son of a bitch."

But you should understand that a case like Sid Nedeau, or the fellow who got
away clean from the Sabbatus potato-field crew, guys like that are winning the
prison version of the Irish Sweepstakes. Purely a case of six different kinds of
luck somehow jelling together all at the same moment. A stiff like Andy could
wait ninety years and not get a similar break.

Maybe you remember, a ways back, I mentioned a guy named Henley Backus, the
washroom foreman in the laundry. He came to Shawshank in 1922 and died in the
prison infirmary thirty-one years later. Escapes and escape attempts were a

hobby of his, maybe because he never quite dared to take the plunge himself. He
could tell you a hundred different schemes, all of them crackpot, and all of

them had been tried in The Shank at one time or another. My favorite was the
tale of Beaver Morrison, a b&e convict who tried to build a glider from scratch
in the plate-factory basement. The plans he was working from were in a


circa-1900 book called The Modern Boy's Guide to Fan and Adventure. Beaver got
it built without being discovered, or so the story goes, only to discover there

was no door from the basement big enough to get the damned thing out. When
Henley told that story, you could bust a gut laughing, and he knew a dozen-no,
two dozen-almost as funny.

When it came to detailing Shawshank bust-outs, Henley had it down chapter and
verse. He told me once that during his time there had been better than four
hundred escape attempts that he knew of. Really think about that for a moment
before you just nod your head and read on Four hundred escape attempts! That

comes out to 12.9 escape attempts for every year Henley Backus was in Shawshank
and keeping track of them. The Escape-Attempt-of-the-Month Club. Of course most
of them were pretty slipshod affairs, the sort of thing that ends up with a

guard grabbing some poor, sidling slob's arm and growling, "Where do you think
you're going, you happy asshole?"

Henley said he'd class maybe sixty of them as more serious attempts, and he
included the "prison break" of 1937, the year before I arrived at The Shank. The
new Administration Wing was under construction then and fourteen cons got out,
using construction equipment in a poorly locked shed. The whole of southern
Maine got into a panic over those fourteen "hardened criminals," most of whom
were scared to death and had no more idea of where they should go than a
jackrabbit does when it's headlight-pinned to the highway with a big truck

bearing down on it. Not one of those fourteen got away. Two of them were shot
dead-by civilians, not police officers or prison personnel-but none got away.

How many had gotten away between 1938, when I came here, and that day in October
when Andy first mentioned Zihuatanejo to me? Putting my information and Henley's
together, I'd say ten. Ten that got away clean. And although it isn't the kind

of thing you can know for sure, I'd guess that at least half of those ten are
doing time in other institutions of lower learning like The Shank. Because you
do get institutionalized. When you take away a man's freedom and teach him to
live in a cell, he seems to lose his ability to think in dimensions He's like

that jackrabbit I mentioned, frozen in the oncoming lights of the truck that is
bound to kill it. More often than not a con who's just out will pull some dumb
job that hasn't a chance in hell of succeeding . . . and why? Because it'll get
him back inside. Back where he understands how things work.

Andy wasn't that way, but I was. The idea of seeing the Pacific sounded good,
but I was afraid that actually being there would Scare me to death-the bigness
of it.

Anyhow, the day of that conversation about Mexico, and about Mr. Peter Stevens 
.

. . that was the day I began to believe that Andy had some idea of doing a
disappearing act. I hoped to God he would be careful if he did, and still, I
wouldn't        have bet money on his chances of succeeding. Warden Norton, you 
see,


was watching Andy with a special close eye. Andy wasn't just another deadhead
with a number to Norton; they had a working relationship, you might say. Also,
Andy had brains and he had heart. Norton was determined to use the one and crush
the other.

As there are honest politicians on the outside-ones who stay bought-there are
honest prison guards, and if you are a good judge of character and if you have
some loot to spread around, I suppose it's possible that you could buy enough
look-the-other-way to make a break. I'm not the man to tell you such a thing has
never             been done, but Andy Dufresne wasn't the man who could do it. 
Because, as
I've said, Norton was watching. Andy knew it, and the screws knew it, too.

Nobody was going to nominate Andy for the Inside-Out program, not as long as
Warden Norton was evaluating the nominations. And Andy was not the kind of man
to   try a casual Sid Nedeau type of escape.

If I had been him, the thought of that key would have tormented me endlessly. I
would have been lucky to get two hours' worth of honest shut-eye a night. Buxton
was less than thirty miles from Shawshank. So near and yet so far.

I still thought his best chance was to engage a lawyer and try for the retrial.
Anything to get out from under Norton's thumb. Maybe Tommy Williams could be
shut  up by nothing more than a cushy furlough program, but I wasn't entirely

sure. Maybe a good old Mississippi hard-ass lawyer could crack him . . . and
maybe that lawyer wouldn't even have to work that hard. Williams had honestly
liked Andy. Every now and then I'd bring these points up to Andy, who would only
smile, his eyes far away, and say he was thinking about it.

Apparently he'd been thinking about a lot of other things, as well.

In 1975, Andy Dufresne escaped from Shawshank. He hasn't been recaptured, and I
don't think he ever will be. In fact, I don't think Andy Dufresne even exists
anymore. But I think there's a man down in Zihuatanejo, Mexico, named Peter
Stevens. Probably running a very new small hotel in this year of our Lord 1976.

I'll tell you what I know and what I think; that's about all I can do, isn't 
it?

On March 12th, 1975, the cell doors in Cellblock 5 opened at 6:30 A.M., as they
do every morning around here except Sunday. And as they do every day except
Sunday, the inmates of those cells stepped forward into the corridor and formed
two lines as the cell doors slammed shut behind them. They walked up to the main
cellblock gate, where they were counted off by two guards before being sent on
down    to the cafeteria for a breakfast of oatmeal, scrambled eggs, and fatty

bacon.


All of this went according to routine until the count at the cellblock gate.
There should have been twenty-seven. Instead, there were twenty-six. After a
call to the Captain of the Guards, Cellblock 5 was allowed to go to breakfast.

The Captain of the Guards, a not half-bad fellow named Richard Gonyar, and his
assistant, a jolly prick named Dave Burkes, came down to Cellblock 5 right away.
Gonyar re-opened the cell doors and he and Burkes went down the corridor
together, dragging their sticks over the bars, their guns out. In a case like

that what you usually have is someone who has been taken sick in the night, so
sick he can't even step out of his cell in the morning. More rarely, someone has
died . . . or committed suicide.

But this time, they found a mystery instead of a sick man or a dead man. They
found no man at all. There were fourteen cells in Cellblock 5, seven to a side,
all fairly neat-restriction of visiting privileges is the penalty for a sloppy

cell at Shawshank-and all very empty.

Gonyar's first assumption was that there had been a miscount or a practical
joke. So instead of going off to work after breakfast, the inmates of Cellblock
5 were sent back to their cells, joking and happy. Any break in the routine was
always welcome.

Cell doors opened; prisoners stepped in; cell doors closed. Some clown shouting,
"I want my lawyer, I want my lawyer, you guys run this place just like a

frigging prison." Burkes: "Shut up in there, or I'll rank you." The clown: "I
ranked your wife, Burkie." Gonyar: "Shut up, all of you, or you'll spend the day
in there."

He and Burkes went up the line again, counting noses. They didn't have to go
far.

"Who belongs in this cell?" Gonyar asked the rightside night guard.

"Andrew Dufresne," the rightside answered, and that was all it took. Everything
stopped being routine right then. The balloon went up.

In all the prison movies I've seen, this wailing horn goes off when there's 
been

a break. That never happens at Shawshank. The first thing Gonyar did was to get
in touch with the warden. The second thing was to get a search of the prison
going. The third was to alert the state police in Scarborough to the 
possibility

of a breakout.

That was the routine. It didn't call for them to search the suspected escapee's

cell, and so no one did. Not then. Why would they? It was a case of what you see
is what you get. It was a small square room, bars on the window and bars on the
sliding door. Rocks on the windowsill .


And the poster, of course. It was Linda Ronstadt by then. The poster was right
over his bunk. There had been a poster there, in that exact same place, for

twenty-six years. And when someone, who was Warden Norton himself, as it turned
out, poetic justice if there ever was anybody looked behind it, they got one

hell of a shock.

But that didn't happen until six-thirty that night, almost twelve hours after

Andy had been reported missing, probably twenty hours after he had actually made
his escape.

Norton hit the roof.

I have it on good authority. Chester, the trusty, who was waxing the hall floor
in the Admin Wing that day. He didn't have to polish any keyplates with his ear
that day; he said you could hear the warden clear down to Records & Files as he
chewed on Rich Gonyar's ass.

"What do you mean, you're 'satisfied he's not on the prison grounds'? What does
that mean? It means you didn't find him! You better find him! You better!

Because I want him! Do you hear me? want him!" Gonyar said something.
"Didn't happen on your shift? That's what you say. So far as I can tell, no one
knows when it happened. Or how. Or if it really did. Now, I want him in my
office by three o'clock this afternoon, or some heads are going to roll. I can
promise you that, and I always keep my promises."

Something else from Gonyar, something that seemed to provoke Norton to even
greater rage.

"No? Then look at this! Look at this.' You recognize it? Last night's tally for
Cellblock Five. Every prisoner accounted for!  Dufresne was locked up last night
at   nine and it is impossible for him to be gone now!  It is impossible!  Now 
you
And him!"

But at three that afternoon Andy was still among the missing. Norton himself
stormed down to Cellblock 5 a few hours later, where the rest of us had been
locked up all of that day. Had we been questioned? We had spent most of that
long day being questioned by harried screws who were feeling the breath of the
dragon on the backs of their necks. We all said the same thing: we had seen
nothing, heard nothing. And so far as I know, we were all telling the truth. I
know that I was. All we could say was that Andy had indeed been in his cell at
the time of the lock-in, and at lights-out an hour later.

One wit suggested that Andy had poured himself out through the keyhole. The

suggestion earned the guy four days in solitary They were uptight. So Norton 
came down.


He stalked down glaring at us with blue eyes nearly hot  enough to strike 
sparks from the
tempered steel bar of our cages. He looked at us as if he believed we were all 
in on it
Probably he did believe it.

He went into Andy's cell and looked around. It was just as Andy had left it, the
sheets on his bunk turned back but without looking slept-in. Rocks on the
windowsill . . . but not all of them. The ones he liked best he took with him.

"Rocks," Norton hissed, and swept them off the window ledge with a clatter.
Gonyar, who was now on overtime, winced but said nothing .

Norton's eyes fell on the Linda Ronstadt poster. Linda was looking back over her
shoulder, her hands tucked into the back pockets of a very tight pair of

fawn-colored slacks. She was wearing a halter and she had a deep California 
tan.

It must have offended the hell out of Norton's Baptist sensibilities, that
poster.

Watching him glare at it, I remembered what Andy had once said about feeling he
could almost step through the picture and be with the girl.

In a very real way, that was exactly what he did, as Norton was only seconds
from discovering.

"Wretched thing!" he grunted, and ripped the poster from the wall with a single
swipe of his hand. And revealed the gaping, crumbled hole in the concrete behind
it    .

Gonyar wouldn't go in.

Norton ordered him. God, they must have heard Norton ordering Rich Gonyar to go
in there all over the prison, and Gonyar just refused him, point blank.

"I'll have your job for this!" Norton screamed. He was as hysterical as a woman
having a hot-flash. He had utterly blown his cool. His neck had turned a rich,
dark   red, and two veins stood out, throbbing, on his forehead. "You can count 
on
it, you . . . you Frenchman! I'll have your job and I'll see to it that you

never get another one in any prison system in New England!"

Gonyar silently held out his service pistol to Norton, butt first. He'd had 
enough. He was
then two hours overtime, going on three, and he'd just had enough. It was as if 
Andy's
defection from our happy little family had driven Norton right over the edge of 
some
private irrationality that had been there for a long time. . .

I don't know what that private irrationality might have been, of course. But I
do know that there were twenty-six cons listening to Norton s little dust-up


with Rich Gonyar that evening as the last of the light faded from a dull
late-winter sky, all of us hard-timers and long-line riders who had seen the

administrators come and go, the hard-asses and the candy-asses alike, and we all
knew that Warden Samuel Norton had just passed what the engineers like to call
"the breaking strain."

And by God, it almost seemed to me that somewhere I could hear Andy Dufresne
laughing.

Norton finally got a skinny drink of water on the night shift to go into the

hole that had been behind Andy's poster of Linda Ronstadt. The skinny guard's
name was Rory Tremont, and he was not exactly a ball of fire in the brains
department. Maybe he thought he was going to win a Bronze Star or something. As
it    turned out, it was fortunate that Norton got someone of Andy's approximate
height and build to go in there; if they had sent a big-assed fellow, as most

prison guards seem to be, the guy would have stuck in there as sure as God made
green grass . . . and he might be there still.

Tremont went in with a nylon filament rope, which someone had found in the trunk
of his car, tied around his waist and a big six-battery flashlight in one hand.

By then Gonyar, who had changed his mind about quitting and who seemed to be the
only one there still able to think clearly, had dug out a set of blueprints.

I knew well enough what they showed him, a wall which looked, in cross-section,
like a sandwich. The entire wall was ten feet thick. The inner and outer

sections were each about four feet thick. In the center was two feet of

pipe-space, and you want to believe that was the meat of the thing . . . in more
ways than one.

Tremont's voice came out of the hole, sounding hollow and dead. "Something
smells awful in here, Warden."

"Never mind that! Keep going."

Tremont's lower legs disappeared into the hole. A moment later his feet were
gone, too. His light flashed dimly back and forth.

"Warden, it smells pretty damn bad."
"Never mind, I said!" Norton cried.

Dolorously, Tremont's voice floated back: "Smells like shit. Oh God, that's what
it is, it's shit, oh my God lemme outta here I'm gonna blow my groceries oh 
shit

it's shit oh my Gawwwwwd!" And then came the unmistakable sound of Rory Tremont
losing his last couple of meals.


Well, that was it for me. I couldn't help myself. The whole day, hell no, the
last thirty years, all came up on me at once and I started laughing fit to

split, a laugh such as I'd never had since I was a free man, the kind of laugh I
never expected to have inside these gray walls. And oh dear God didn't it feel
good!

"Get that man out of here!" Warden Norton was screaming, and I was laughing so
hard I didn't know if he meant me or Tremont. I just went on laughing and
kicking my feet and holding onto my belly. I couldn't have stopped if Norton had
threatened to shoot me dead-bang on the spot. "Get him OUT!"

Well, friends and neighbors, I was the one who went. Straight down to solitary,
and there I stayed for fifteen days. A long shot. But every now and then I'd
think about poor old not-too-bright Rory Tremont bellowing oh shit it's shit,
and then I'd think about Andy Dufresne heading south in his own car, dressed in
a nice suit, and I'd just have to laugh. I did that fifteen days in solitary
practically standing on my head. Maybe because half of me was with Andy

Dufresne, Andy Dufresne who had waded in shit and came out clean on the other
side, Andy Dufresne, headed for the Pacific.

I heard the rest of what went on that night from half a dozen sources. There
wasn't all that much, anyway. I guess that Rory Tremont decided he didn't have
much left to lose after he'd lost his lunch and dinner, because he did go on.

There was no danger of falling down the pipe-shaft between the inner and outer
segments of the cellblock wall; it was so narrow that Tremont actually had to
wedge himself down. He said later that he could only take half-breaths and that
he knew what it would be like to be buried alive.

What he found at the bottom of the shaft was a master sewer-pipe which served
the fourteen toilets in Cellblock 5, a porcelain pipe that had been laid

thirty-three years before. It had been broken into. Beside the jagged hole in
the pipe, Tremont found Andy's rock-hammer.

Andy had gotten free, but it hadn't been easy.

The pipe was even narrower than the shaft Tremont had just descended. Rory
Tremont didn't go in, and so far as I know, no one else did, either. It must

have been damn near unspeakable. A rat jumped out of the pipe as Tremont was
examining the hole and the rock-hammer, and he swore later that it was nearly as
big as a cocker spaniel pup. He went back up the crawlspace to Andy's cell like

a monkey on a stick.

Andy had gone into that pipe. Maybe he knew that it emptied into a stream five
hundred yards beyond the prison on the marshy western side. I think he did. The


prison blueprints were around, and Andy would have found a way to look at them.
He was a methodical cuss. He would have known or found out that the sewer-pipe
running out of Cellblock 5 was the last one in Shawshank not hooked into the new
waste-treatment plant, and he would have known it was do it by mid- 197 5 or do

it never, because in August they were going to switch us over to the new waste 
treatment
plant, too. Five hundred yards. The length of five football fields. Just shy of 
half a mile. He
crawled that distance, maybe with one of those small pen lights in his hand, 
maybe with
nothing but a couple of books of matches. He crawled through foulness that I 
either can't
imagine or don't want to imagine. Maybe the rats scattered in front of him, or 
maybe they
went for him the way such animals sometimes will when they've had a chance to 
grow
bold   in the dark. He must have had just enough clearance at the shoulders to 
keep

moving, and he probably had to shove himself through the places where the 
lengths of
pipe were joined. If it had been me, the claustrophobia would have driven me 
mad a dozen
times over. But he did it.

At the far end of the pipe they found a set of muddy footprints leading out of
the sluggish, polluted creek the pipe fed into. Two miles from there a search
party found his prison uniform. That was a day later.

Three months after that memorable day, Warden Norton resigned. He was a broken
man, it gives me great pleasure to report. The spring was gone from his step. On
his last day he shuffled act with his head down like an old con shuffling down

to the infirmary for his codeine pills. It was Gonyar who took over, and to
Norton that must have seemed like the unkindest cut of all. For all I knee, Sam
Norton is down there in Eliot now, attending services at the Baptist church

every Sunday, and wondering how the hell Andy Dufresne ever could have gotten
the better of him.

I could have told him; the answer to the question is simplicity itself. Some
have got it, Sam. And some don't, and never will.
